docs: The Layout Process (#29)
NativeScript/docs: content/guide/the-layout-process.md

---
title: The Layout process
---

Getting views to render with the right dimensions and positions requires a run of the layout process. When rendering, a recursive process runs through every view in the **view hierarchy** in two passes &mdash; a measure pass and a layout pass.

During **the measure pass** every view is measured to obtain its desired size. The following properties are considered during the measuring:

- `width`, `height`

> - `minWidth`, `minHeight`

Reviewer: Does minWidth and minHeight work in {N} now?

Reviewer 2: It should yeah: https://github.com/NativeScript/NativeScript/blob/7a353eca1481fc8ca3c23f36250aa2300011c89d/packages/core/ui/styling/style-properties.ts#L187-L221

- `visibility`
- `marginTop`, `marginRight`, `marginBottom`, `marginLeft`

During **the layout pass** every view is placed in a specific layout slot. The slot is determined by the result of the measure pass and the following properties:

- `marginTop`, `marginRight`, `marginBottom`, `marginLeft`
- `horizontalAlignment`, `verticalAlignment`

The layout process is by nature an resource-intensive process and it's performance highly depends on the number views (and complexity).

> <!-- TODO: fix links -->

Reviewer: Reminder of the TODO

:::tip

> Try to keep the view hierarchy as flat as possible by utilizing different [Layout Containers](/ui-and-styling#layout-containers) rather than relying on excessive view nesting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's a good practice to minimize deep nesting of views. Instead, utilize different [Layout Containers](https://chat.openai.com/ui-and-styling#layout-containers) to achieve a simpler and more organized view hierarchy. This approach improves readability, maintainability and performance.
```

**For example:** don't treat `<StackLayout>` as a `<div>` &mdash; instead try to use a `<GridLayout>` with specific `rows` and `columns` to achieve the same result:

```html
<StackLayout>
  <StackLayout orientation="horizontal">
    <SomeItem />
    <SomeItem />
  </StackLayout>
  <StackLayout orientation="horizontal">
    <!-- ... -->
  </StackLayout>
</StackLayout>
```

> <!--  -->

Reviewer: Comment was going to be added here?

Reviewer 2: This is used to not combine 2 code blocks into tabs, but instead keep them separate (at least in the old docs, subject to change in new setup - but should be fine to leave there).

```html
<GridLayout rows="auto, auto" columns="auto, auto">

>   <SomeItem row="0" col="0" />

Reviewer: Is SomeItem are real tag name in {N}?

  <SomeItem row="0" col="1" />
  <!-- ... row="1" ... -->
</GridLayout>
```

> One-offs are fine with the `<StackLayout>` approach, but building a whole app with the first approach will usually result in poor performance.

Reviewer: Really?  I disagree.  StackLayout isn't terribly expensive, at least not compared to using GridLayout.

Reviewer 2: Deeply nested StackLayouts would be more expensive than a single flat GridLayout
